
LSR Number: 25-0830

Title: establishing a committee to study data sources of all entities
operated by all branches of government that are or are potentially
made available to the public, identify the data formats of those
sources, and recommend legislation to standardize types and formats of
data output from all or select governmental entities.

There is a ton of information that is already in IT systems within
state government that could be / should be surfaced for citizens to
see.

Despite there being dozens of state reps interested in the topic, and
hundreds of New Hampshire citizens who have joined a Signal group to
forward this project, the exact details of how to do this are unclear.

Thus, this proposes a study committee.

More details can be found here :

	https://travis4nh.github.io/open-gov-data-init/

	The Open Government Data Initiative advocates for laws that force
	government to proactively publish data in machine-readable
	formats.

	It is non-partisan ; we support exposing all data, whether that
	might support the policies of the left, the right, both, or
	neither.

	It does not advocate for government-provided tools to view or read
	data; it advocates only for the publishing of data.

	( The OGDI believes in The Unix Philosophy: small tools, loosely
	coupled. Make the government provide the data and the free market
	will do the rest! )

	In New Hampshire we have RSA 91-a.

	These are better than nothing, but inadequate.

	Both of these require:

	- that a citizen know what information they want

	- that a citizen send in a request to the government


	- that the citizen wait for the government (often there’s a
	‘deadline’, but (a) there are no penalties when the government
	breaks the deadline, (b) the deadline can be satisfied by the
	government merely replying by the specified date “this may take up
	to three years”).  that the citizen pay for reproduction costs
	Further, the data

	- does not come back in a machine-readable format

	- is published, at most, once, and not repeatedly (e.g. annually,
      quarterly, weekly…)

